So hello everyone and welcome. This is
the first discussion of a small series
we're doing for Dr. Safereed's official
YouTube channel. Uh where we're aiming
to get Dr. Safe discussing his research
with other researchers in the field. And
today we have Dr. Dominic Di Austinino
here as a guest with Dr. Thomas Safeed
to discuss their research together. My
name is Morgan and I'm a student of Dr.
Safes. I've been following his research
and his colleagues research for about
three years now and I'm here to help the
Safe Reed Lab get the message out to the
public through YouTube and Instagram.
And so I'll give just a brief disclaimer
as well that this discussion isn't meant
as medical advice but rather a
discussion of the science. And I'd like
to introduce our guest Dr. Dominic Di
Austinino first. He is a researcher and
a professor at the University of South
Florida and the Diagosina lab conducts
research to understand the efficacy and
mechanisms of ketone metabolic therapies
on various diseases primarily cancer
which we'll be discussing today. And as
you all know Dr. Safe is a professor of
biology and a researcher at Boston
College whose lab examines metabolic
therapies such as calorie restriction,
fasting and the keto diet and the
mechanisms by which these help manage
chronic diseases such as cancer. And so
welcome to you both.
>> Great to be here. Thank you Morgan.
>> Yeah, thank you very much Morgan. It's
very nice that you're arranging this.
>> Thank you. So I'd like to begin with the
first question which is when and how did
you both start to collaborate on
research?
>> Um I could start out. So I was actually
familiar with Dr. Safe Freed's research
on seizures and uh and I think I have
been studying uh central nervous system
oxygen toxicity seizures for a little
over 20 years uh funded by the office of
navy research. So oxygen toxicity
seizures occur with really high levels
of oxygen and it's a limitation of
hyperbaric oxygen therapy. So the
guidelines sort of are capped at three
atmospheres because of the potential for
tonic clonic seizures that happen when
you go above three atmospheres of
oxygen. Uh and it's also a limitation
for our special operations community
that use a closed circuit rebreather
that the Navy Seals. So being funded by
the Navy, they wanted to understand the
cellular and molecular coralatess of CNS
oxygen toxicity and I started that
research in 2004 and anti-seizure drugs
really don't provide a whole lot of
efficacy for preventing these seizures.
Uh only when you use dosages that
basically put put someone into a sedated
coma almost. You have to use really high
dosages to block these very powerful
seizures. I went through a nutrition
course in undergrad but didn't really uh
the ketogenic diet was not talked about
but I stumbled across the Charlie
Foundation which was really the only
website that came up you know at that
time and saw ketogenic diets uh could
prevent seizures and then I stumbled
upon Dr. safe's work in 2007
I believe and a year after that he had
published an article on uh cancer
studies looking at calorie restriction
and a restricted ketogenic diet and
cancer and then I became increasingly
interested in that uh as we and I could
talk about it later. We observed a
number of different cells, you know, in
high-pressure oxygen. And we curiously
observed these cancer cells uh were
generating significantly more oxidative
stress or super oxide annion and we had
different dyes for that and they were
dying at a level of oxygen that was
relatively non-toxic to healthy cells
and I did not understand why. And then
uh and I talked to a number of different
people and then a couple years later I
talked to do Dr. safe freed and his
theory that he was advancing was really
explaining what I was observing under
atomic force microscopy and laser
scanning focal microscopy when I was
looking at the mitochondria. So then and
that that from that that kind of
spearheaded
uh or launched our discussions and then
ultimately our collaborations.
>> Yeah. and and I can attest to that
because I think we had an opportunity to
meet at at one of the a couple of the
meetings uh that were run by the Charlie
Foundation. There was one in particular
in Liverpool, England, uh when when when
Don was first starting to get these
observations together and then we
started to collaborate uh with the
possibility of gain gaining a better
understanding of the molecular
mechanisms by which oxygen stress um
might be effect a a non-toxic
therapeutic strategy uh for managing uh
certain types of cancers. And then it it
became more and more clear to us that uh
radi radiation uh would kill cancer
cells by creating oxidative stress but
but in a in a non-specific way uh by by
creating reactive oxygen species as as a
kind of bombs in the micro environment.
And if a cancer cell happened to be near
that uh it would be blown up. But with
um high pressure uh oxygen therapy,
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, it's it's it
seemed to be more um selective for
killing the cancer cells. As Don
mentioned, the normal cells seem to be
uh more u resistant to this and and and
we know that the cancer cell having
insufficient oxidative phosphorilation
uh by nature uh produces more ROSS. Um
the problem of course is that their
utilization of glucose and glutamine uh
are metabolized to high levels of
antioxidant
protection uh through glutathione and
superoxide dismutase and things like
this. But we we just we thought then if
we would lower the glucose and the
glutamine that would be uh their
metabolites like glutamate from
glutamine and through the pentos pathway
uh from from glucose carbons. If we
could lower the two fuels uh and then
expose organisms can mice uh that would
have cancer to this higher pressure uh
oxygen utilization. it might be more
selective for killing the tumor cells.
And and we were beginning to see this
with Dr. Poff who worked with Dom. Um
and we were starting to see that wow uh
this could be a really effective
non-toxic way a as potentially a
substitute or together utilization with
radiation therapy because the ketones
would protect the normal cells but not
the tumor cells and the tumor cells
would be made more vulnerable uh to
oxidative stress. So together uh with
the late uh uh Dr. you and and Joseph
Maroon uh from the University of
Pittsburgh, we put together a press
pulse strategy where where Dom and I
discussed how we would how we would take
this whole cancer problem and and and
and break it down uh to a manageable a
very manageable disorder uh knowing full
well the fuels that were driving it and
the uh vulnerabilities that we could
realize once we would press down the
fuels and pulse the fuels driving the
disregulated growth and then make them
super susceptible to hyperbaric oxygen
and calorie restriction and things like
this and so far it seems to be working
really really well better in people than
in mice which has always been one of the
great things that we've that we've been
able to find and do and I realize that
in the in time uh press pulse
therapeutic strategy will become the
standard of care uh the the issue of of
course is it's not uh broadly recognized
nor are the mechanisms that do and I
have been talking about also broadly
recognized but once they are it it to me
it has all of all of the power to manage
cancer uh very effectively and also
gives us the opportunities to bring in
all kinds of new approaches that work
together with the pressing uh of of the
glucose fuels and the pulsing uh of
glutamine fuels together with hyperbaric
oxygen a variety of other strategies
that we're now beginning to realize for
the first time are effective. So the
collaboration
uh is working very very well and is and
is continuingly
improving. So uh would you agree Dom?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And I I think
I'd like to add too that you know even
before engaging in a discussion um with
you Dr. Dr. I I talked to a number of
people at the Moffett Cancer Center I
and a number of cancer investigators and
u they did put on my radar the Warberg
effect and they kind of said well
there's this guy that you know he's he's
very kind of out there and advancing a
theory that's a little bit controversial
but his name is you know Dr. Thomas safe
freed and and then I I' I think it the
article came out in 2010 cancer as a
metabolic disease and nutrition and
metabolism and it was after getting that
article and just reading it over like
five times and pulling out all the
references saying this is extremely
compelling and prior to that we observed
that high pressure oxygen causes uh a
massive increase in super oxide
in these in a number of different cancer
models including a GBM model and that
they die faster and and that we measure
super oxide with mitos red and
dihydrotheidium. So, we knew it was
coming like from the mitochondria, but I
didn't understand why at the time. And I
was also looking at something like 2D
deoxy glucose and different glycolytic
inhibitors, which can also be used for
the anti-seizure effect. And noticed
that we're trying to grow these
different model cells. And it was easier
to work with these immortalized cell
lines, these cancer cell lines. And just
it was causing, you know, reducing their
growth and increasing um their cell
death. And so essentially we observed
that that blocking glycolysis, reducing
glucose or using a glycolytic inhibitor,
you know, significantly impacted these
cancer cell growth and increased cell
death. And oxygen was toxic to the
cancer cells. And then what was really
interesting is that we kept glucose at
the same level and when we added
ketones, we saw an increase in uh cancer
cell death with ketones. and it also uh
suppressed their proliferation
>> and we used uh the D and the L anantimer
of that. So and that's that's kind of
another story we can get into because
I'm very interested in that. So the
observation that ketones had an anti
anti-cancer effect that reducing
glycolysis had an anti-cancer effect and
that hyperbaric oxygen had a cancer
killing effect. So we saw the
opportunity to sort of combine these
things in a synergistic way that could
be non-toxic and that essentially became
the PhD dissertation project of Dr.
Angela Poff uh who who came into my lab
with a high interest in cancer but I had
not been studying it. you know, I had a
little bit of startup funds. So, that
kind of kicked off, you know, some some
studies. And then ultimately, I had
requested Tom, I don't even remember
that, but I wanted to do very
specifically a brain cancer model. And
then you talked me into the VM M3 model
of metastatic cancer. And I was like,
well, I really want the brain cancer
model. It's like, no, you have to work
with this [clears throat] model of
metastatic cancer. And I remember it
kind of made the the the front page of
International Journal of Cancer or
something like that. And I remember
reading that and I was like, "Okay, this
is a good direction to kind of go into
and then that I think it was about 2010
we actually kicked off
>> with experiments using your models."
>> Yeah. Well, I I think the the VMM3 model
is a brain cancer model.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh but it also metastasized outside of
the brain.
>> Yeah. It's a good point. Yeah. and and
and the issue of course I ran into a lot
of problems um in trying to get uh grant
NIH grant support uh for that model
because the reviewers uh said oh uh GBM
doesn't metastasize glyopblasto doesn't
metastasize outside the brain and then I
said what what do you what do you mean I
said I have 70 articles here that that
you are unaware of showing clearly uh
that glyopblasto does in fact uh can
metastasize outside the brain and they
stopped doing organ transplants
uh from patients with GBM because the
recipients that were getting these
organs developed
metastatic cancer. So where where did
that come from? Uh it came from G GBM
cells that had metastasized outside the
brain. Um but for whatever reason the
field seems to be locked into these
preconceived notions and we're resistant
to the idea uh of this this concept that
um metastatic cells uh can occur in
glyopblasto as a m as a matter of fact
uh the most invasive and spreading cell
of the GBM I is a mezenl uh neoplastic
meenal cell which we think is derived
from micro ga. So a neoplastic microglea
cell uh are loaded in some of these uh
GBMs and they have the they have the
capacity to spread into the bloodstream
and spread throughout the body but in
small numbers and a lot of GBM patients
unfortunately die before they recognize
uh cancer cells outside of the brain.
So, but the issue of course of
metastasis which is which is ultimately
one of the biggest challenges in cancer.
How do you stop a cell from spreading
through the body? Um because you know if
you have a localized group of of
neoplastic cells that have not yet
spread uh either surgical debulking or a
radiation approach could cure that that
kind of a a condition. It's when the
cells begin to spread uh that we have
this bigger problem and uh we we now
know that that all metastatic cells have
characteristics of macrofasages a meenal
kind of cell dependent on glucose and
glutamine for for survival. So we have a
pretty clear idea of how to how to kill
metastatic cancer cells uh using
metabolic therapies which are
combinations of hyperbaric oxygen
targeting simultaneously targeting
glucose and glutamine. Unfortunately,
the field doesn't doesn't recognize
that. And one of the great tragedies in
my mind is is that the approach to try
to stop metastatic cancer um u about
almost 50% of the people treated uh are
being are killed from the treatments
rather than the cancer. um uh which is
another tragedy when we clearly know uh
based on work of Dom's and our work
together that these metastatic cells are
remarkably dependent on glucose and
glutamine and and they can't they can't
metabolize ketone bodies uh or fatty
acids effectively and now become
extremely extremely vulnerable um to
hyperbaric oxygen if you can put the
patient in nutritional ketosis and then
again with low doses of glutamine
targeting drugs and glucose targeting
drug drugs drugs like 2Dox
um we we can annihilate these tumor
cells and keep the normal body super
healthy. Um and this is one of the great
um important issues in cancer is how do
you how do you selectively kill
spreading tumors while enhancing the
health and vitality of the normal cells
in the body and Dom and I have worked
out a lot of this. Uh it's just the
challenge of trying to convince people
that this is the way it is has been
harder than actually knowing how to kill
cancer cells.
It's just the field is resistant to it
more more than the the field is more
resistant than the tumor cells. Can you
believe this? [laughter]
I I I think too what the idea that Dr.
Seed was advancing like when I first
read cancer is a metabolic disease. Uh I
really appreciated it from the
perspective of being a physiologist. So
I was trained as a neuroscientist but
also uh I I was trained to understand
the neural control of physiological
regulation or autonomic regulation. So I
was trained as a physiologist but then
had to take neuroscience classes too. So
I you know I appreciated and understood
that when you change your metabolic
physiology you are changing the fuel
that you're running on. So you are
dramatically enhancing and upregulating
fatty acid fat metabolism and ketone
metabolism and really suppressing the
hormone insulin. So it's it's more than
just ketones and glucose and ketones and
hyperbaric oxygen. So I also think of
you know a well- formulated ketogenic
diet or ketone metabolic therapy which
includes uh ketone supplementation that
does not increase insulin. I I think
about it as insulin suppression therapy
and that by suppressing the hormone
insulin, you're suppressing glycolysis.
You're limiting glucose availability to
the tumor. You're elevating ketones, uh
a fuel that the cancer cells can't use
effectively for energy. And then in that
context, uh cancer cells have
dramatically upregulated oxidative
stress and you're simultaneously
inhibiting some of the endogenous
antioxidant mechanisms. So the cancer
cells are selectively vulnerable to
oxidative stress and you know we know
the efficacy of radiation therapy is
proportional to the partial pressure of
oxygen of the tumor and we know that
hyperaric oxygen reverses tumor hypoxia
and it also sort of decreases the the
lactate in the micro environment and
that acidified micro environment really
really makes the tumor resistant to uh
standard of care therapies.
So I mean at the time before reaching
out to Dr. See for the mafet was kind of
interested in this idea of enhancing you
know their therapies with hyperbaric
oxygen because of the radiation therapy
and things like that and now the
interest too is uh enhancing hyper
oxygenation enhances T-C cell metabolism
and infiltration and also reduces
uh PD PDL1 expression and enhances also
checkpoint inhibitor therapy. So uh
right now the mafet actually has a
ketogenic diet trial on CARTT therapy.
So that there's been an interest and I
think it was mostly spearheaded by Dr.
Seafruit because of the work he's
putting out and other people now looking
at ketogenic therapies to enhance the
adaptive immune system
uh to work to make you know standard of
care therapies that are emerging work
better. And that's super I'm interested
in that area too. But I'm mostly
interested in, you know, developing a
comprehensive non-toxic metabolic based
oxidative stressbased therapy for these
cancers. And I think that's the I'm kind
I feel like I'm working in kind of two
different fields where I'm sort of, you
know, embracing the idea of using this
as standard of care. And I know Dr.
Seafford has some thoughts on that. But
at the same time, I think my passion is
really to to work with a team to to
advance the the use the the development
and the application moving the science
to human application of non-toxic
metabolic oxidative stress therapies.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's really good. Getting
getting back to what you raised there
which was the acidification of the micro
environment preventing many standards of
care from working which includes
radiation chemotherapy as well as the
checkpoint inhibitors and potentially
carti amotherapy. All all of these
approaches
uh have been re recognized to be uh less
effective or poorly effective because of
the acidification uh of the cancer micro
environment. And the acidification is
primarily coming from the waste products
of the fermentation metabolism that is
that is driving the disregulated cell
growth and that being lactic acid. And
uh what we have shown and what what what
we've shown is suinic suinic acid. Uh
suxinic acid is the end waste product of
the glutaminolysis pathway. Um the
tumors need um um uh we we we have now
provided the strongest evidence that the
amino acid glutamine is actually
fermented uh in the mitochondria of the
tumor. Um and then suxinic acid, the
endroduct of the glutaminolysis pathway
is dumped out along with lactic acid. So
uh uh and and glutamate is another
excitatory amino acid that's also dumped
out. It's vented out from glutamine. So
so this is creating an acidic micro
environment. The waste products of the
fermentation driving the disregulated
growth creates the acidification. So if
you simultaneously restrict glucose
through nutritional ketosis and then you
use glutamine targeting drugs pulsed
uh rather than pressed because the
immune system is uses the same fuel
glutamine. So it becomes essential to
understand how the immune system and the
tumor systems are both uh both using a
common fuel and we have to then uh uh do
a strategy so ma to maintain the health
of the immune system while while slowly
degrading um uh the tumors and and and
and removing the acidification of the
micro environment allowing allowing some
of these other therapies to come in at
ex much much lower dosages uh which make
once the tumor cells are are restricted
of their fermentable fuels and the micro
environment becomes less acidified, you
don't need much radiation. You don't
need you need very little immune
therapies. You need very little of this
because the tumor cells now become super
uh super vulnerable to the lowest doses.
So overall, it's a win-win situation uh
for the patient in many many different
ways and for and for the attending
physicians because you'll be able to
manage these cancers so much more
effectively. Uh this is not being
currently done. Um we're we're we're
giving patients high doses of immune
therapies and toxic chemo and all this
other stuff trying to break through the
acidification when we clearly know how
to stop the acidification. Um and so
this this will move. So eventually
you'll have a a hybrid system where the
cancer cells uh the patient is placed
into a state of nutritional ketosis. Um
one of the one of the hang-ups about the
field is the term diet ketogenic diet.
Ketogenic diet is very ambiguous. Uh
what what's more what's more important
is the state of nutritional ketosis uh
which can be enhanced by ketone
supplementations
uh and and various various uh
nutritional strategies. uh that will
bring lower glucose and elevated
ketones. Uh and this can be done with
pescatarian diets, carnivore diets, um
all all kinds of um diets. uh and it
could be uh strategized per person as
very very specialized for gender
differences, cultural differences,
religious differences. As long as the
patient can get into a low glucose
ketone index, which is what we've
defined as being in nutritional ketosis,
uh having a low GKI, uh five or below to
kill cancer cells, you need to go a
little bit further below that. And then
you come in, uh you reduce the
acidification. Uh you can come in with
oxygen. Oh, oxygen. beautiful oxygen
therapy works so much better on the
patients. And then and then you can
strategize uh which imunotherapy uh
which member of the standard of care can
then be brought in uh to finish off
surviving tumor cells because the ones
that survive uh the metabolic therapy
will all have something in common um
having survived this. uh therefore an
epitope on the surface of these cells uh
could make these cells remarkably
vulnerable uh to a more another another
strategy. So we we all as I've said many
times in these in these podcasts, we
already have all of the tools in the
tool chest to effectively manage cancer
with minimal to no toxicity. It's just
that we're not using the tools
appropriately. the ones that we have. We
have to redesign how we treat patients
from the very beginning and how we trans
transition them from one stage to the
next bringing in uh all of the different
uh uh tools that we have which is
hyperbaric oxygen which is ketone
supplementation which is simultaneous
targeting of glucose and glutamine and
then and then monitor the patient as how
they're going through the system. Many
of these people start getting super
healthy. uh many of these people that
had diabetes and high blood pressure and
hypertension along with cancer, all of
those other things start to disappear
along with the tumors. And as we said in
the press pulse strategies that Dom and
I wrote, um we take patients from a very
diseased state uh and then we gradually
move them into a managed state and with
further improvements in doses, timing
and scheduling, we could potentially
bring them into the resolution state. uh
and and this is this is the goal of
press pulse therapeutic strategy taking
all of the tools that we have developed
and knowing the mechanisms by which they
work and bringing them all together in a
synergistic interaction to allow these
patients to survive much longer with a
higher quality of life.
>> Yeah. And and it's it's important to
appreciate its many mechanisms kind of
working in synergy too. Uh and with
nutritional ketosis or ketone metabolic
therapy. I mean, that could be
implemented with a calorierestricted
ketogenic diet. If the patient's
underweight uh ukaloric diet, uh if
they're overweight, you could do
significant calorie restriction. You
could do therapeutic fasting to set them
off and to quickly get them into
ketosis. And then we have focused a lot
of attention and work on developing
ketone supplementation uh that is
remarkably effective at lowering the
glucose ketone index. And I think
there's different types of ketone
formulations that have a greater
anti-cancer effect that some of the
esters will increase insulin. So you
want to develop something like a a a
buffered electrolyte
uh DL beta hydroxybutyrate that is more
effective. It does has no effect on
insulin but has some anti-cancer effects
to that. There has been quite a bit of
push back on ketogenic diets primarily
because of the high fat content of the
diet. But if it's calorie restricted,
>> yeah,
>> you know, or even ukaloric, there's no
basically every cardio, I like to say
cardioimmuno neuromabolic biomarker
because what's healthy for the heart is
healthy for the brain and also enhances
uh the immune system in ways that has an
anti-cancer effect. Every
cardiometabolic, you know, biomarker is
going to improve. Uh there's one
biioarker that mainstream medicine has a
myopic focus on even a manic focus on
and that's LDL cholesterol
>> primarily because we don't have to go
too much into it we have drugs that
lower LDL cholesterol and a so there's a
you know some doctors will push back on
the the high elevation in some patients
you know of the LDL cholesterol um I've
consistently seen in cancer patients
that LDL drops as their cancer
progresses and I think there's reasons
kind of for that but like low LDL is
associated with faster cancer
progression. Um, so maybe there's an
opportunity to use statins too because
you know cholesterol is used for the
biosynthesis of tumors but I think the
the push back on ketogenic diets is not
really founded in
you know good understanding of metabolic
physiology and you know I think it does
more harm than good especially in the
context of like a GBM patient so if
they're getting push back from their
doctor on that u and we just have such
good data that these diets in the
context of standard of care being
completely ineffective or refractory in
the context of ketone metabolic therapy
and other things that we're talking
about we could make those therapies
dramatically effective and reduce the
side effect and reduce the dosages
so uh so I I do think about this as an
adgiant in that setting but ultimately I
think the future is coming up with a
comprehensive metabolic based approach
that that could ultimately replace the
standard of care. Um, which is archaic.
Not that I mean there's some
immune-based therapies that work great
for multiple myoma, lymphoma, and other
uh types of cancers. And I think they
are lifesaving and I know quite a few
people uh but for advanced metastatic
cancer, brain tumors and a number of
cancers that um
you know I think a metabolic based
approach should be embraced and utilized
in a way and then the standard of care
approaches that are being used now could
be used later if if they need to be you
know after monitoring the patient. I
think that's uh if we're talking about
quality of life and really ultimately
the patient's survival.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, you know, Dom, I think you're
right. Um getting back to the
cholesterol and and these kinds of
things. Um those problems happen when
the when the when the therapeutic
ketosis strategy is not done correctly.
We we always emphasize calorie
restriction. Um, no one should go out uh
and eat a tub of lard uh thinking that
that's going to help their their
situation, but there's so much
misinformation in the diet world uh from
ketogenic diets are so unhealthy because
they're full of fat. But you you can do
a calorierestricted carnivore diet.
You can do a calorierestricted pescatan
or even a a Mediterranean diet as long
as it's restricted and and blood glucose
goes down and ketones go up measured by
the glucose ketone index calculator. And
and when you're on the right path, the
best a good blood marker in my mind is
triglycerides. But we we see when you're
when you're in ketosis, nutritional
ketosis, your triglycerides are down and
which is one of the one of the key
biomarkers for cardiovascular health,
you keep your triglycerides down. I'm
not as concerned about the cholesterol
issue as I am about the triglyceride
issues. Uh and if you're on a low, if
your triglycerides are dropping, your
blood sugar is going down, your insulin
levels uh are going down, your ketones
are going up, you generally enter into
the state of nutritional ketosis, which
is exactly pretty much the same as all
of our ancestors. uh during the
paleolithic period of our existence as a
species um we were all in a state of
nutritional ketosis because we didn't
have as as as Bud Vich used to say we
didn't have delicateessence or doughnut
shops on every corner so our ancestors
were were were always in some state of
nutritional care they had a lot of
exercise very few carbs a lot of meat
they were generally devoid of the
chronic diseases that are crippling uh
the world population today and we know
this pretty much because if we look at
tribes like uh Albert Schwitzer had done
uh looking at the how how anc tribes
that followed their traditional ways uh
a lot of the chronic diseases that are
plaguing us today were not even known or
or seen in in many of these tribes. So
they were living in a state of
nutritional ketosis, a lot of exercise,
a lot of natural organic foods, uh, all
organic as a matter of fact, and and
they h they did not have chronic
diseases. Um, yes, our ancestors did not
did not have um they died predominantly
from injuries and infections uh mainly
because we didn't have antibiotics, we
didn't have orthopedic surgeons, and we
didn't we we didn't have a lot of the
things that we have today. But they were
not dying from chronic disease. Today we
are riddled with all kinds of chronic
diseases, cancer being the number one uh
in that regard and we we are just trying
to use our understanding of metabolic
therapies to bring the body back uh to
the way it should be a state of
nutritional ketosis uh a and and in
managing uh a very aggressive disease
that we think can be managed more
effectively. And yes, it will be the
combined synergies uh of all of the
different tools that we have. Uh, and I
and I agree with I agree with that. But
again, there's so much misinformation
about ketogenic diets being harmful and
uh, and none of these are done the right
way. If you do it the right way, it's
always almost always very therapeutic.
And when you see arguments that say,
"Oh, these patients didn't do well."
They never went into a low GKI in the
first place. They they had other issues
that were standing in the way. they
weren't imple they were eating ad
liabbidum or unrestricted amounts of of
fats and things like this which are very
unhealthy. So we need good nutritionists
and dieticians who also understand the
concepts of what Dom and I are talking
about so they can guide their patients
through uh through the strategies
through through the requirements of of
what they'll need to do to bring
themselves back to u what we call
metabolic homeostasis. And this is an
extremely important concept metabolic
homeostasis. Uh when you have chronic
diseases your body is not in
homeostasis. you're out you're out of
balance. You're metabolically out of
balance. What nutritional therapeutic
ketosis does is bring you back into a
state of metabolic homeostasis where
cancer cells and other other issues
associated with chronic diseases become
less and less problematic and eventually
will disappear. We can cure type 2
diabetes with metabolic therapies. You
can get rid of hypertension. uh uh you
you a lot of neuroscsychiatric problems
uh that are afflicting people can be
managed with nutritional ketosis. So and
we're using the GKI as simply a
quantitative biomarker to allow people
to know what does it mean to be in
nutritional ketosis? What do I have to
do? How do I know I'm there? Uh well,
you have a glucose ketone index uh
marker that we are developing as a tool
to allow people to know uh what stage
they're in. And then uh whatever disease
you might have whether it's
cardiovascular disease or or or cancer
or one of these others uh even dementia
uh it most dementias are the result of
metabolic inh homeostasis
uh um bad diets and lifestyles that are
putting pressure on and all of it
eventually comes down to mitochondrial
health. That's ultimately what we're
dealing with here. Uh mitochondrial
dysfunction is the underlying uh
pathological process uh of all of these
different chronic diseases including
cancer. Cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder. Otto Warberg was the
first to define cancer as a metabolic
disease. The field went off the track
thinking that it was a genetic disorder.
We have now accumulated enough
information to show that cancer cannot
be a genetic disease. It's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease. So we
must view it as that and then develop
strategies and approaches knowing that
and the outcomes on patients overall
health the reduction of chronic diseases
in the country and throughout the world
will happen uh once once people come to
realize uh what do and I are talking
about here
>> and I just want to add like I think
there's like four things that you really
need to pay attention to when a patient
transitions to ketone metabolic therapy
and I think there's biomarkers and
that's a whole discussion I've given
talks on that but just the cardioabolic
biomarkers glucose uh ketones insulin
HSCP
uh triglycerides HSCP is actually a
better cardiovascular risk factor to
monitor than LDL cholesterol like the
hazard ratio it's like higher
>> okay what how do you define HSRP
>> high sensity high sensity C reactive
protein so yeah high sensity C reactive
So mine trended to be high and now it's
like it's non-detectable or 0.1 or 0.2
since I've been in ketosis. So that has
>> why why you're always in ketosis or
almost. How is it possible that you
could even have a C reactive protein
elevation?
>> Oh well that's just like your normal. So
I have been elevated my C reactive
protein has been elevated two times.
One, I lived underwater for 10 days in a
NASA analog and I came up and I was
breathing, you know, 4,000 parts per
million of CO2 for a while and under a
lot of stress and another time
>> I came back from Southeast Asia and I
had a gut bug and I had some intestinal
permeability that boom that triggers an
immune response. So
>> your immune response is good. I mean it
keeps you it's
>> uh HSCP is an indicator that your immune
system is activated. So you see it with
you know age- related chronic diseases
and autoimmune diseases. Uh but when
someone goes on ketone metabolic therapy
there are biomarkers that need to be
monitored.
>> You want to uh you want to ensure
they're not losing strength. If they're
losing strength they're losing muscle
and just their overall vitality, right?
So there you want to monitor. I'm a big
advocate of like ensuring muscle
strength. They should be get getting a
DEXA scan like o over time once a year
at least or once every if they because
it's easy to lose muscle if you calorie
restrict too much and subjectively you
want to make sure the patient feels good
on a ketogenic diet. So they need to be
coached and we know that ketone
metabolic therapy can have a tremendous
uh impact on mental health. it there's a
whole field that has developed
spearheaded by uh the bazooki group on
metabolic psychiatry and I think when a
cancer patient is diagnosed with cancer
when they get chemotherapy and things
like that they have a they get anxiety
they get depression and this is
increases exponentially. So I think one
area of research that we need to like
focus on is actually improving the
mental health of patients that have
cancer. And one effective way to do that
is another I don't want to call it you
know make it sound like a panacea but
when you're in a state of nutritional
ketosis and you maintain that it has an
anxolytic effect. It actually can
decrease symptoms of major depression.
Dr. Jeff Bolick just published on that.
It could target it could help with
bipolar, schizophrenia,
uh, and also, you know, a a wide variety
of anxiety disorders. So, I think this
is another sort of feather in the cap or
ketogenic.
>> Well, well, sure. And and if you're
treating your patients initially cancer
patients with nutritional ketosis
upfront with a press pulse therapy that
we developed the probability of them
getting into a neuroscychiatric problem
would be re reduced in the first place
>> because you wouldn't be you'd be
lowering the the drugs that would be
initiating these kinds of uh
neuroscsychiatric problems. So, so
clearly all of these aspects we have a
strategy uh that can mitigate many of
many of the issues that cancer patients
are are are dealing with. The the the
the biggest I I would say a a a very
large problem is getting this
information into the clinics. Um when
you talk to oncologists, they have never
heard of almost anything you and I have
just discussed. Um the the discussion is
not even uh mentioned. It's not medical
students in the medical schools are not
getting any information uh h about
managing chronic diseases using
metabolic therapies. Yet chronic disease
represents the single biggest drain of
health care uh costs in in the world. Uh
and and um uh you know everybody's
yelling and screaming about health care
budgets and all this. most of it's for
managing chronic diseases. A and and we
have a clear plan and a strategy for
managing cancer and all these different
chronic diseases. Uh but the information
is either not known or misunderstood or
or and I think I think the there's a
massive educational mission that needs
to accompany what you and I have been
discussing and studying for quite some
time. And I'm not sure how we do that.
Dom, what what are our strategies for
doing that? Well, it's true. Oncologists
are not formally trained in it, but I'll
say no less than three oncologists have
reached out to me for guidance because
they personally got diagnosed with
cancer.
>> So, they they are from the field and
they are just seeking information and
they're just finding what they can find
online uh for three different types of
can. So, you know, I think uh you know,
mainstream oncology and academic
institutions that have cancer research
programs, they're very interested in
enhancing their standard of care. So,
I've kind of, you know, been working in
that domain. I think there's a lot of
potential there. But I think to move
this and advance the science into human
application, uh, we really do do need
federal funding, state funding,
probably philanthropic support most like
maybe industry funding, too. I'm not
against industry. I I think we should
get funding wherever we can get it to
just advance,
you know, the concepts here. And it's it
can be very daunting and overwhelming
everything that we're talking about. But
at the very least, ketone metabolic
therapy is achieving and maintaining a
glucose ketone index of like one to two
or one to four, I think. And there's a
straightforward way to go about
approaching that. And then there's many
different add-on drugs and things that
you could do in addition.
>> What what what is what do you what do
you think your GKI is today?
>> Oh, I just measured it. So, I have
[laughter] uh I have Oh, I GKI, right? I
got the the keto mojo right here. You
can see there's still blood on the strip
here. [laughter] So,
>> but so I'm testing it. I'm actually have
various experimental agents here that
I'm testing. If Yeah.
>> If you consume this, you would this
would kill five people into keto
acidosis. It's a very
>> Well, you always had those kinds of
things. But we we had a test here in the
lab uh a couple of months ago where we
we were going down into uh to test what
we needed to do on a carnivore. So, so
when I went out and I I bought some nice
ribeye steaks and Philly minans with
sauce and this kind of stuff. And uh
after four I I started off I was about
50. Uh which which is um I think it was
late high 40s 50. Um and and then after
about uh five days I I was down to a 10.
Um I got down to a 10. But if I had
taken and one of the guys in the lab GKI
a GKI of 10,
>> okay,
>> going from 48 to a 10. But one of Dr.
Dur in the lab had consumed some of your
we were all supposed to be uh doing our
whatever we need, but he chugged some of
your ketone solution and and he got down
down below below two. He was down like
1.5. So, so, uh, he kind of cheated on
the group, um, because we were all
supposed to see what a what a carnivore
diet would do. But if you, I'll tell you
another thing. If you exercise when
you're on these diets, you get down you
get down into these low zones uh uh
really fast. The the qu the question
that we have for people is how you
maintain to stay in the in the longer
you stay in those in those zones uh the
more pressure you're putting on cancer
cells and the healthier your normal
cells in the body, the brain, everything
is getting. Um, so the strategy is not
only getting to the zone, but also
maintaining yourself in the zone. And we
know that people will fall out of the
zone periodically. How long does it take
to get back into the zone after you go
out and eat a pizza uh or or a big
donut? And then you have to bring your
body back into that zone again because
you can't we can't allow people to feel
uh terribly depressed because they're
not enjoying uh their life what we have
in our society. So this all becomes the
diet and lifestyle issue. Um, I don't
know if everybody everybody is as
disciplined as you are. Uh, but most
people aren't there. Uh, and and you
have to stay in those zones and you have
to have a strategy to allow people to
enjoy a party. Uh, well, of course, if
you have a deadly cancer, you might want
to, but I'm talking about for prevention
of cancer because because you it's hard
to get cancer if your mitochondria are
healthy. Uh, we have never found a
person with cancer having a healthy
mitochondria. they're always
dysfunctional in some way, especially
for oxidative phosphorilation. So,
prevention of cancer and chronic
diseases means that you should always be
monitoring your GKI. Knowing you don't
really have to stay solo. If you were to
have cancer, you better get down into
those low zones to kill the tumor cells.
But this knowing right now there's a
lack of knowledge on what to do and how
to do it and and you and others will
define strategies to help these people
remain in these zones. what what how
level what level of flexibility do you
have in your diet and lifestyle to pop
out of the zone and get back into it uh
in different ways? Maybe a ketone
supplementation and exercise would bring
you back into the zone. See, this is the
cutting edge. Um we know what we need to
do. Uh we know how to get there, but we
need to know what is the best way to
maintain uh for whatever you for
whatever you're dealing with. Are you
dealing with you just want to prevent
yourself from ever getting cancer or a
chronic disease? Or now that you have a
chronic disease or cancer, what is the
best way that I can stay in the zone?
What is the best way that I can feel
that I'm I'm I'm working to resolve the
problem that I have and I'm doing the
the thing that it's nice about
nutritional ketosis is a lot of the
effort falls on the shoulders of the
individual. You don't have to be
allowing a a a system that is failing uh
in managing cancer and some of these
other diseases. Uh you now have charge
of your destiny because you now
understand this. But they also need
instructions a and they need assistance
and they need guidance from people like
yourself and others uh that can help
these folks because because it does
become a real challenge and I think this
is this is some of the areas that we
need to we need to focus on as well.
In regard to implementation, you need to
set guard rails. So, you need an
accountability partner. I think that's
going to be important. You can't It's
hard for one person to do ketone
metabolic therapy if everybody else in
the household's eating, you know, right
processed food. Uh so, you could use,
for example, a continuous glucose
monitor
>> and then set the parameters that when it
pops up above a certain uh threshold for
glucose that it it, you know, gives an
alarm. And you know that we know that in
in in research if we have subjects wear
a continuous glucose monitor we can
unambiguously monitor their adherence to
a ketogenic diet because their glucose
is not going to spike
>> right so I think and there like in the
fitness world you know on the weekends
or whatever you know it's it's pretty
common for people to just prepare all
their food for the week and then set all
their meals aside so this is what I'm
going to eat for the week and I think
that sort strategy could be adopted by
the cancer patient. Alternatively, there
are food companies out there. Trifecta
is one of them. Uh I think I've had
conversations with that they will just
send you, you can allocart, you could
pick low carb, you could pick keto or
whatever. They'll send you a whole week
of food uh to your house on your
doorstep and you could eat that. And I
think, you know, that could be maybe
affordable for some people, but maybe
not all people. But I think everybody
can everybody can eat and you could just
go whatever is on your grocery list and
whatever you have in your house that's
what you're going to eat. So, if you're
following a ketogenic diet, you have to
ensure that when you go and buy food
that you your food list includes foods
that are, you know, uh in line with a
ketogenic diet meal plan and that you
have that and you you know,
>> well, as you said,
>> as you said, if you're monitoring, if
you have a continuous glucose or better
yet, a continuous glucose ketone
monitor,
>> so you don't have to prick your finger
uh to do a keto mojo. Uh you and you
have these um zones that you said would
these what you call them?
>> Uh
>> yeah, I mean you could do
>> warnings. You have a warning. Um
>> yeah, you could do time and range too.
>> Time and range. Absolutely. This is
exciting. So So people people will know
uh when they eat something like what you
might eat, what I might eat, what Morgan
may eat may elicit a different GKI. Um
so each person will have to know what
what arrangements of foods and and uh
selections would be optimal for their
particular uh state of ketosis. Um, and
that, as I said, that could vary, but
your age, your gender, all of these
things could make a difference. And, and
everybody will have to be using them
themselves as a guinea pig to know at
what zone of the GKI they find
themselves uh that produces a range most
efficient for their for their body. So,
this then um again, it's an experiment.
Right? Now you see without that
knowledge people are guessing what they
are unless they do the mon from a keto
mojo or something like this uh they're
primarily guessing and and oh I'm in
keto. How do you know? Well I've been
eating avocados all day. Yeah. Well
what's your GKI? Well I I don't know. I
never measured it. So, so again once
once the fac once it becomes easy to
measure the GKI with a variety of
different approaches, I think we're
going to start to shift uh and reduce
all kinds of chronic diseases because
people will know what to do and how to
do it. And right now we have that gap in
uh in in utilization of all this. So I'm
looking for I think this is a very uh
fruitful area. I I think this is the
future. Um we know we have a chronic
even RFK Jr. said we have a chronic
disease issue. He's not wrong about
that. We do. Uh and and and you and I
and others, we have a strategy to manage
that. Uh and and and and we the ones who
know, we are the ones that understand
the mechanisms and how to do this, I
think, better than anyone else does. So,
so um because we you and I have had the
longest exposure to this stuff and we've
been thinking about it for a long time
and we've been designing experiments to
test all this and it's not yet perfected
but it's certainly on the right path uh
for uh for for a deliverable uh solution
to the chronic disease problem including
cancer and and I'm excited about it.
>> Yeah. And 20 years ago there was like no
cancer metabolism conferences. So now
you have like keynote conferences. Now
you have like major cancer societies and
organizations have like cancer
metabolism like conferences and stuff.
they they're approach it from maybe a
different perspective from you know
a lot of people in you know cancer
oncology are molecular are geneticists
or molecular biologists and maybe they
don't have an appreciation for metabolic
physiology and I think that's that is
important because you change your
physiology you change the tumor micro
environment
>> oh yeah
>> in a way that you know suppresses cancer
and
>> you know at this point we do not have a
cure for cancer, but we have really we
have evidence-based
research and mechanisms that we can uh
you know target with ketone metabolic
therapies. And we also know that, you
know, there's an we know now that in
regard to modifiable ways to prevent
cancer, if you look at 12 of them, and a
recent review came out maybe about a
year or two ago by um do you know that
cancer journal? It's like the flagship
journal of the American Cancer
Foundation. It's a it's an impact factor
of 500. I didn't even know that was
possible, Tom. Yeah.
>> Journal of the National Cancer
Institute.
>> Yeah. It's it's their flagship journal
and it was and they
>> they me it's a it's an actually an
impact factor of 500 which I didn't know
I had to fact check
>> existed yeah
>> it's the highest impact journal so they
published an article on uh modifiable
risk factors for cancer and uh and and
of the 12 I would say eight or nine of
them were directly related to metabolic
health right like obesity like smoking
was the top but that's going to be
replaced by like obesity, it's like, you
know, high blood glucose, inflammation,
like all these different things. Uh, and
then the ones at the bottom maybe that
were not included were some things like
uh maybe H pylori or different like
Epstein bar virus and things like that.
But but I also think that ketone
metabolic therapies can be used to
augment the immune system
>> uh and even change the the microbiome,
for example, to even target things like
H. pylori or to enhance your immune
system in a way to prevent some of these
viruses from having encogenic uh effects
like in the body. So I think you know
adopting this way I'm very interested in
basically protocols that people could do
for five days or maybe a week once every
month or three months that could put
themselves into a state of you know
therapeutic ketosis for a predetermined
time frame and work by Valter Longo
showed that you have lasting effects
from that you know two three weeks even
months if you can achieve and maintain a
glucose ketone index which would be
equivalent based on his research between
like one and four and you do that you
know five days out of every month or two
and I think that can actually produce
long-term changes in various biomarkers
that would correlate with prevention of
cancer.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, we we did some
studies years ago with the mice when we
fasted them. Now, a mouse a mouse with a
40% calorie restriction is like a water
only fast for humans. and uh uh like a
7-day water only fast for a 40%
restriction. And then when we refed the
animals um they were they were eating
less food uh but maintaining the
constant body weight that they had which
means that their entire physiology
has been uh made more efficient. Um body
weight is a critical variable to know
how how your body is overall
physiological state. So these animals
were eating um 8% less food than they
did before they had the the the
therapeutic fasting and yet maintaining
this the same body weight. So so clearly
the energy efficiency they they were
they were more energy efficient in what
they were doing. This could possibly
explain what Longo was saying that your
body has has learned uh to become more
energy efficient. Uh the problem
>> dieting tomorrow. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But the problem with
that is of course is if you're eating a
high carbohydrate meal, you're going to
gain you're going to gain weight a lot
faster after after doing something like
this. So uh but again these are the
issues. Once you understand uh this then
then you can develop approaches to to uh
to deal with it. And right now
everything seems to be for a lot of
people a mystery. They don't understand
this and they don't understand that. But
but with respect to the drop in cancer
deaths, the biggest was the anti-smoking
campaigns from the 1990s. Not any new
development in drugs, there's been very
the cancer has increased consistently.
Uh and I get a little peeved when I hear
people say that oh we've made enormous
progress in cancer or the progress was
the anti-smoking campaign predominantly
very none of these new drugs are having
any major effect on dropping death rates
and that's because they're think that
cancer is a genetic disease. All of the
new drugs are being developed they're
all based on the molecular biology of
cancer which is a genetic problem. And
if it's a mitochondrial metabolic
problem, uh you're never going to get a
a reduction in in death rate. Once you
realize that you that this is a
mitochondrial metabolic problem, uh it
explains why the anti-smoking campaign
was so effective and you can then
institute and get real reductions. You
can get real reductions in the in in
dropping the death rate. But a
constantly approving EGFR receptor
imunotherapies or all this other stuff.
Uh this is not going to um make any
major differences. Um the other thing
too is I I agree with you. I never use
the term I never I try never to use the
term cure. What we're interested in is
management. And I I think if if if
survivability for a particular deadly
cancer like leoplast or pancreatic
cancer or advanced lung cancer, I if if
you can triple or quadruple the months
of survival in a higher state of quality
of life, I consider that success. If you
can make glyoplasto a fiveyear survival,
the norm rather than the exception, I
consider that success. Um, so, so you're
giving people an opportunity to live on
the planet with a higher quality of life
far greater than anything that's
currently being done. I consider that
success. So, if the management runs long
and you die from old age uh, from
something other than cancer that you had
when you were in your 30s or 40s, then
you were cured. But we don't know
because at any time under a certain
circumstance, cancer could come back
again and and then you say, "Well, you
didn't cure me." Well, we never were the
design was never to cure. It was to
manage. And if the management lasts long
enough, then you can say you were cured.
But I I think we should always look for
successful management. And what does
that mean? It means a high quality of
life with no evidence of disease. Uh in
the case of Pablo Kelly who lasted 10
years with a glyopblast, uh it never
went away. He was just managing it with
metabolic therapy. He had four debulking
surgeries and died from a cerebral
hemorrhage on the last on the last
surgery that he never died from the
glyopblastoma. He died from from a
surgical problem. So he lived 10 years
had two children, got married, he had
married and two children. That's what I
call success because had he gone
standard of care, he would have been
dead within uh a year or or 12 months
like like the physicians told him. So so
I consider him a success. But I consider
so many other people a success. They're
living longer with a higher quality of
life because they've done metabolic
therapy. And you and I are perfecting
this. So the managements can be pushed
and pushed and pushed far into the
future, which is success. And this this
level of success is far greater than
what's currently being done with
standards of care, which as I said so
many times are so toxic uh uh based on
an incorrect theory and incorrect or
lack of understanding of the of the very
uh topics that you and I have been
discussing.
>> Would it be all right if I jump in with
a quick question?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Because Dom and I can go on for
hours. [laughter]
>> That's perfectly fine. you've been
you've been going through all of your
research together, which is exactly what
we wanted. But based on all that great
summary of your past research and how
really ketogenic metabolic therapy can
potentially become the new standard of
care for cancer. I wanted to touch upon
a very common audience question that you
get Dr. safe read in your comments
sections where a lot of people ask um
when they've heard about the press pulse
protocol and KMT for the first time. The
first question they ask is are there any
clinics or potentially clinical trial
groups that are providing this guidance
to patients? What would you both have to
comment on that?
>> Well, I I mean I I get that all the time
from thousands thousands of people who
who contact me. They get all excited.
They hear what Dom and I are talking
about and then they go to their major
clinics. Um whether it's MD Anderson or
Dana Farber, Sloan Ketering, the Mafet,
I maybe Fred Hutch, all of these
different cancer centers. And a lot of
the times the people, well, I never
heard of it. Um uh what do you mean
this? Glucose has nothing to do with
cancer. And the patients get very, uh
very disillusioned and feel feel very
bad. Sometimes they're met with
hostility, but the but the issue is is
why are there no clinics? Why why are
the top medical schools not entertaining
uh what we're saying? And and again, a
lot of it has to do with the power of
the of the system. Uh the system is
based on large profits. Can the cancer
industry is a multi-billion dollar
industry and and I think I think the I I
hate to say it, but it's it's revenue
generation.
uh how how do you generate revenue uh to
the same level as we're currently
generating uh when you're using
calorierestricted ketogenic diets,
ketone supplementation, exercise uh and
a lot of the things that you and I that
Dom and I have been speaking about. It
has not yet got into the mainstream uh
because it it would be very unsettling
to a lot of programs to to have people
wanting that as opposed to very
expensive toxic therapies. Um why I
think there are some more clinics
opening up. We're starting a new uh um a
new society of of of metabolic oncology
inter international society of metabolic
oncology where dom is a participant as
well as I and many others. There are is
a growing uh awareness that that what
we're speaking about will be very
effective in managing cancer. Um but we
need more education. We need clinics
that will allow us to do that. we have
to have uh open-minded people in the
IRBs, institutional review boards, who
are interested more in patience than
revenue generation. Um and then and then
once you start having that uh you'll
start to see a ground swell of interest
and perfection uh of what we're talking
about. But but right now that's big one
of the biggest problems as I was telling
Dom is that poor these poor people, they
have nowhere to go. Um and and we're
doing the best we can to try to train
people. uh and a lot of it's being done
on Zoom and small clinics and and um but
it's it [snorts] should it's not yet
mainstream by by by by any stretch of
the imagination. So we need to get it
out. We need to have people have this
opportunity to be treated by
knowledgeable physicians, people who
know what Dom and I were speaking about,
people who are able to integrate
standards of care effectively into what
we're talking about. Uh we have some
clinics opening up in Istanbul, Turkey.
As a matter of fact, we were talking to
a couple of folks the other day, MDs in
their clinic where they're where they're
uh many of their uh stage 4 pancreatic
cancer patients are living beyond five
years doing metabolic therapy. Uh we
have to publish these papers as well. We
have to let the the scientific medical
community know what was done and how
these people are living so long, what
was done. So again, it's an educational
mission. It's a scientific mission. Um,
but right now it's a that's one of the
biggest problems. These poor folks have
nowhere to go uh to get the stuff that
that Dom and I are talking about. Um, so
that that has to change and and once it
changes then I think we're going to see
a big drop in cancer and a lot of these
other chronic diseases.
>> Yeah, I think the problem is
multiffactorial and kind of
multi-dimensional in some ways. So,
you know,
they're going to ask, I mean, we really
need systematic reviews and metaanalyses
of the literature to show to convince
people. So, that's going to require, you
know, gold standard RCT therapies on
these things to uh and it's not going to
be done as a standalone. typically going
to be done to to augment but you also
have a lot of heterogeneity
within within the the field of cancer
like the different types of cancer. So
but I think it's it's most important to
focus uh as Dr. Dr. Safe Freed has done
on glyopblastoma because that's kind of
like the the therapy that if you can
make some inroads into that then we'll
have kind of a basic understanding that
that cancers that are highly glycolytic
you know that have this mitochondrial
damage and that uh really are have the
hallmark characteristic or phenotype of
the Warberg effect that they're going to
be responsive to to metabolic therapies
and you need cancer institutes do not
even have on staff registered dieticians
that are trained in understanding
ketogenic therapies unless it's for
pediatric epilepsy or or something like
that. So there needs to be education
into the power of nutrition
you know in in cancer uh in metabolic
management of cancer and and there needs
to be uh there needs to be guidelines
for implementing this and oncologists
need to really expand the field of
oncology needs to expand into met you
know metabolic oncology and even
exercise is a very powerful tool the the
research Arch behind exercise and
oncology is remarkable. So uh exercise
oncology so that could be you know
another field uh but I think of exercise
also as a form of metabolic therapy. So
even just a cancer patient implementing
this could just do you know two 20 to 30
minute brisk walks each day you know if
they're able to do that and that's going
to have a tremendous effect. uh and it's
just simple things that that cancer
patients can do. But when a cancer
patient goes to a clinic, the standard
of care happens to you. So with ketone
metabolic therapy, what we're talking
about here, the the ketone metabolic
therapy is implemented by the patient at
in their home. you know, ideally under
the guidance of a trained registered
dietician who is has a background in,
you know, implementing uh and advising
uh and directing patients because every
patient is a unique metabolic entity and
they really need to be coached and
that's why I really emphasize you know
biomarkers looking at you know
quantifying and measuring your body
composition over time looking at
subjective things like your your mental
health and your energy levels like all
these things need to be taken into
consider. consideration to get the best
outcomes for cancer patients because
otherwise if it's implemented improperly
there the potential for harm can exist
if there's too much restriction if
there's you know diets that are not well
formulated. Uh and even with some of the
off label applications or offlabel
drugs, you know, they they have the
potential to do harm if they're not uh
you know, utilized uh in a really
strategic way, in a really, you know,
>> uh calculated way.
>> Yeah. Well, I you know, Dom, I agree. Um
well, you're we I know we started with
GBM glyopblastoma only because they
really don't have anything. there's been
no advance in a hundred years for that
managing that that cancer and we have a
clear strategy for keeping these people
alive a lot longer but I am not I I now
having having looked at in detail all
the major cancers uh we have never found
a cancer with a normal number structure
and function of mitochondria or having a
normal uh sufficient oxidative
phosphorilation meaning that every major
cancer will be susceptible to ketogenic
metabolic therapy because every major
cancer has the same pathological
problem. They they are dependent on a
fermentation metabolism of glucose and
glutamine. We have never found a cancer
that can survive without glucose and
glutamine. So that means lung, breast,
colon, bladder. So, so uh I I don't see
cancer I see it as a singular disease
not as multiple disease heterogeneity
only in the form of genetic mutations uh
but not in the form of of a metabolic uh
problem they all have they all all major
cancers we have looked I just been in
our new big paper on the on the
emergence of the mitochondrial metabolic
theory and the warberg hypothesis we
have found that all major cancers have a
insufficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation requiring a dependency
on substrate level phosphorilation which
is a fermentation meaning that all the
major cancers will be uh susceptible to
management with ketogenic metabolic
therapy. We just focused on GBM because
they have nothing but they really don't
have anything for advanced lung or
pancreatic cancer either. Um but those
cancers are remarkably susceptible to
the same therapeutic. This is the this
is what's really important. All major
cancers are a common disease of energy
metabolism and metabolic therapy targets
that common pathological problem meaning
that we have a strategy for managing all
major cancers and and I h we have the
scientific evidence to support uh what
what I'm saying but I agree I mean we
started with GBM because they're really
desperate and and lack of anything but
we can do the same thing for all the
major cancers um early stage cancers can
be can be stopped dead in tracks. Um,
so, so, uh, yeah, I'm I'm I'm I'm
excited about this and I know it it's
very controversial to what the NIH uh
says that cancer is a hundred different
diseases. They say it's a genetic
disease on their website. I mean, these
are this is all misinformation. Uh, that
that's that needs to be corrected. and
and and the guys down there at NIH, uh,
they better get their act together soon
because the people are learning what's
going on and they better be consistent
with the science and if they're not
consistent with the science, they're
doing a great injustice to the American
and the world population.
>> I have a question to follow up on that.
I wanted to hear both of your opinions
because you both briefly mentioned
funding and the need for more funding
for this kind of research. Based on both
of your experience doing research in
this field, is there or does there seem
to be a bias in organizations like the
NIH who provide grant funding for this
type of research if it doesn't involve a
drug or a treatment?
>> Well, you know, it's not necessarily a
drug or a treatment. It's the theory
under which we view the disease. If if
if cancer is considered a genetic
disease and you're coming in with
something that's unrelated or
different from that uh then you have to
real you're not going to get funded and
and who are the people sitting on the
study sections in in at the NIH who
award the grant? They're ultimately the
people who make decisions. And if you if
you're saying that, you know, we're
studying a way to manage cancer that
does not involve targeting genes or
sequencing genes or doing this kind of
thing. Um the the enthusiasm is much
less than if you're doing what
mainstream thinks is to be done. This is
why the paradigm shift has to happen. It
it's not a genetic disease. Um and and
people who think it is are are standing
in the way of progress. And the majority
of the NIH National Cancer Institute
thinks cancer is a genetic disease. So
you're dealing with a very foundational
resistance because the theory is what
we're talking about is a different kind
of a theory for the disease. It's a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder. It's
not a genetic disorder. The evidence is
so overwhelming against that theory that
you have to be living in the dark ages
not to see it. So so that has to change.
Once that changes, then there's going to
be a ground swell of funding and
interest in what we're talking about.
But that time is not today.
>> The idea I just want to put out there
because there's also epigenetic
regulation and the metabolic control of
epigenetic regulation can be pretty
profound. So these metabolites in
circulation not only function as you
know in in energy and and and in you
know growth and things like that but
these metabolites lactate and beta
hydroxybutyrate for example there's
there's a field called you know a
process called beta hydroxybutilation
where the beta hydroxybutyrate can
directly interact with the histone and
cause histone modifications that can
activate uh gene programs that have an
anti-cancer effect. So I think if the
field I think the field can embrace this
idea of altering metabolic physiology
with ketone metabolic therapies to
actually produce an epigenetic effect.
We know that ketones have can uh
function as histone dicetylase
inhibitors and and you know there's a
whole anti-cancer drug class with
histone dioetylles inhibition. So um so
I I'm
I have uh an outlook perspective that I
I think the field can sort of mesh that
people on the genetics and metabolism
can kind of converge on epigenetic
modulation and there could be some cross
talk to advance some of these metabolic
therapies and maybe uh re re repackage
them as metabolic epigenetic therapies
because there's a dynamic interaction
between the metabolic control of
epigenetic regulation and also immune
regulation. So our gut microbiome for
example is profoundly changed with
dietary therapies and metabolic
therapies and uh and there's various uh
things like you can you can expand the
the carti therapy you can expand tea
cells with uh and beta hydroxybutyrate
plays a big role at sort of expanding
the the te- cells so that's why mafett
is looking at carti therapy and ketone
metabolic therapy so I I think I I'm
hope I'm hopeful that the field will
kind go into the direction and and think
about these ketone metabolic therapies
as
uh in more advanced terms and I think
there's a lot to unpack and understand
in regard to you know even delving into
the multiomix the transcrytoics the even
metabolomics uh because I think these
things are are it's kind of simple it
could be packaged in a simple way for
the patient but I think there's a lot
for the scientist to unpack in how these
things and even personalizing therapies
too using some of these advanced tools
that are already being used in in
oncology
and that could be you know big NIH1
grants program project grants. I had uh
an email this week from Casey Dantis
from the state level. They were
specifically asking for proposals with
rapid implementation that included
nutritional therapies, repurposed drugs
and ivormectin. So, I was like I had to
read it over like three times. Like
they're literally uh asking at least in
in Florida for proposals, $2 million
proposals that would include ideally
nutritionalbased therapies, repurposed
drugs and ivormectin. And I was just
like this is this is sort of you know
maybe Florida's a little bit more
innovative at the state level and asking
but they are very imple and it was just
a 12 weeks and it had to be something
that could be rapidly implemented in
patients. So hopefully the NIH can
embrace that spirit of things outside of
mainstream on
>> Are you are you going to apply for that
grant?
>> I'm working on that today. [laughter]
>> I use Ivormectin all the time. And my
blood levels of ivormectin are off the
charts because we have this pon that you
do with the cows and everything and I
just rub it in. I never even wear
protection. But we do it, you know, you
could do it orally subcq injection or
the pon stuff and I use that.
>> Well, we we we were planning to do
Ivormectin studies, but it became such a
hot political topic I didn't want to get
into it uh way back a couple of years
ago. But but you know we we we have a
paper in bioarchchives now but it's
going to it's under review for a bigger
journal um on embendazol the parasite
medication uh knowing that embendazol
targets glycolysis and glutaminolysis
pathways uh and when you put it under
calorierestricted ketosis it works it
works really really well we haven't
tested ivormectin yet uh but we we have
that in the plan uh uh to look to look
at at that it because it turns out that
the parasites And so many people make a
mistake. They say cancer is a parasite.
Cancer is not a parasite. But parasites
and cancer cells use common metabolic
pathways for survival. And some of these
parasite medications that wipe out these
parasites do effective job in wiping out
the cancer, especially especially when
you're in nutritional ketosis. So again,
repurpose drugs, but again, they're very
cheap. Um they're not like big
blockbusters that are going to make the
drug companies billions of dollars. Um
that doesn't mean that doesn't mean we
can't find new glutamine targeting drugs
or things like this. Um but but we're
certainly realizing that repurposing
drugs again as I said all of the
majority of what we need for managing
cancer is already there. We just have to
know how to use these things better. um
Don six deoxxyorusine
uh the best glutamine targeting drug
that we we can find and we're learning
now how to reduce its toxicity uh
especially under nutritional ketosis.
So, so, so we're, and that's another
thing when you're in nutritional
ketosis, so many of these other things
work so much better.
>> Uh, everything works better when you're
in nutritional ketosis. Uh, and all
cancer patients should be in this state.
Uh, and yeah, the hybrid systems are
coming in. Um, epigenetic mitochondria
are the most powerful epigenetic system
in the cell. They control the nucleus.
They are the controllers of the destiny
of the cell. they when the nucleus needs
to do something, it's usually under the
under the under the direction of the
mitochondria because without energy,
nothing works. So, so um so yeah, I'm
I'm enthusiastic about it and I think
there's going to be a real lot of major
breakthroughs coming down the pike here
in a very short period of time
hopefully. That's our that's our hope.
>> Thank you very much to you both. This
has been a really fruitful discussion.
Um I think Dr. D. Augustino, if you have
to jump off the call.
>> Yeah, I do have to jump off the call,
but sort of I want to mention that in
the in the time that I've been in this,
you know, short interview, I've gotten
about five messages from patients about
and one is from an oncologist, you know,
asking for more information about this
for themselves. So uh so this is you
know an emerging topic of great interest
and I think just getting more awareness
um out there and educating people on
this will hopefully stimulate the
conversation to make you know funding
more available um and to develop
resources and protocols that are that
that could be available for patients and
I think that's the most important thing.
I
>> think you both are doing a great job and
bringing this information to the public.
I'm very excited to get this video out
here.
Thank yougan.
>> Thank you very much for your time.
>> You know, thank you very much for your
time as well.
>> Thanks for hosting, Morgan. Appreciate
it.
>> A pleasure. It was my pleasure.
>> Open for a part two anytime. It was good
seeing you, Tom.
>> Yeah, great seeing you, Don.
>> Jump into teaching.
>> Yeah, you [clears throat] take it easy
now.
>> Thank you.